# Learning sequential and structural dependencies between nucleotides for RNA N6-methyladenosine site identification

**Abstract:** N6-methyladenosine (m6A) is an important RNA  methylation modification involved in regulating diverse biological  processes across multiple species. Hence, the identification of  m6A modification sites provides valuable insight into the biolog-  ical mechanisms of complex diseases at the post-transcriptional  level. Although a variety of identification algorithms have been  proposed recently, most of them capture the features of m6A  modification sites by focusing on the sequential dependencies  of nucleotides at different positions in RNA sequences, while  ignoring the structural dependencies of nucleotides in their three-  dimensional structures. To overcome this issue, we propose a  cross-species end-to-end deep learning model, namely CR-NSSD,  which conduct a Cross-information Representation learning pro-  cess integrating Nucleotide Structural and Sequential Depen-  dencies for RNA m6A site identification. Specifically, CR-NSSD  first obtains the pre-coded representations of RNA sequences  by incorporating the position information into single-nucleotide  states with chaos game representation theory. It then constructs a Cross-information reconstruction encoder to learn the sequential  and structural dependencies between nucleotides. By minimizing  the reconstruction and binary cross-entropy losses, CR-NSSD is  trained to complete the task of m6A site identification. Extensive  experiments have demonstrated the promising performance of CR-NSSD by comparing it with several state-of-the-art m6A  identification algorithms. Moreover, the results of cross-species  prediction indicate that the integration of sequential and struc-  tural dependencies allows CR-NSSD to capture general features  of m6A modification sites among different species, thus improving  the accuracy of cross-species identification.

# Overview

We conduct a cross-information Representation learning process integrating Nucleotide  Structural and Sequential Dependencies, and then develop a cross-species end-to-end deep neural network model, namely CR-NSSD, to effectively identify m6A modification sites. Specifically, CR-NSSD first obtains the pre-coded representations of RNA sequences by incorporating the position information into single-nucleotide states with chaos game representation (CGR) theory , which is an iterative mapping technique to visualize the patterns of nucleotide positions in RNA sequences. Preserving more accurate long-range sequence correlations, pre-coded representations are able to generalize the temporal fractal features of RNA sequences by the positions of single nucleotides. The sequential and structural dependencies are then learned through a carefully designed cross-information Reconstruction Encoder (CRE). Inside CRE, a three-layer causal dilated convolution is first applied to capture the global sequential dependencies between nucleotides based on their temporal fractal features. Furthermore, for each RNA sequence, its graph structure is learned by  a novel regional self-attention mechanism. Based on the graph, we calculate a self-correlation Laplacian operator for each sequence to learn the structural dependencies between nucleotides. We then project the output into the frequency domain to capture the repeated common patterns of sequential and structural dependencies of each sequence and further improve the quality of the representations. Finally, a mask attention block is designed to minimize the information loss. The reconstruction and cross-entropy losses are adopted to train our model. To evaluate the performance of CR-NSSD, we have conducted a series of extensive experiments by comparing it with several state-of-the-art identification algorithms. Our results have shown that combining sequential and structural dependencies between nucleotides can improve the accuracy of m6A modification site identification across different species, and also opens a new avenue in the sequence-based identification algorithms with deeper insights gained from exploiting the multi-view dependencies between nucleotides.

# Requirements

```python
python==3.7
pytorch==1.7.1
numpy==1.19.5
scipy==1.5.4
pandas==1.1.5
```

